# User Frequently Asked Questions

### What is TruffleRuby?

TruffleRuby is a high performance implementation of the Ruby programming
language. Built on the GraalVM by Oracle Labs using the Truffle AST interpreter
and the Graal dynamic compiler. TruffleRuby is one part of GraalVM, a platform
for high-performance polyglot programming.

### What is Truffle?

Truffle is a Java framework for writing AST interpreters. To implement a
language using Truffle you write an AST for your language and add methods to
interpret -- perform the action of -- each node.

Truffle also has the concept of specialisation. In most AST interpreters the
nodes are megamorphic -- they handle all possible types and other possible
conditions. In Truffle you write several different nodes for the same semantic
action but for different types and conditions. As runtime conditions change, you
switch which nodes you are using. After the program has warmed up you should end
up with an AST that is precisely tailored for the types and conditions that you
are actually using. If these conditions change, you can just switch nodes again.

### What is Graal?

Graal is a new implementation of a just-in-time compiler (JIT compiler, or we'd
normally say *dynamic compiler*) in the OpenJDK Java Virtual Machine. Unlike the
current compilers, Graal is written in Java, and exposes a Java API to the
running program. This means that instead of emitting bytecode a JVM language can
directly control the compiler. However this is complicated, so normally Truffle
uses Graal on your behalf to *partially evaluate* your AST interpreter into
machine code.

### What is GraalVM?

The GraalVM is a platform for high-performance polyglot programming. The GraalVM
is the easiest way to get and use TruffleRuby.

See [Using GraalVM](using-graalvm.md).

More concretely, the GraalVM is a modified version of the OracleJDK that
includes Truffle, Graal, TruffleRuby and other languages running on the Truffle
framework including JavaScript, Python and R.

### How do I get TruffleRuby?

The easiest way to get TruffleRuby is the GraalVM, available from the Oracle
Technology Network. This includes the JVM, the Graal compiler, and TruffleRuby,
all in one package with compatible versions.

See [Using GraalVM](using-graalvm.md).

### Why is TruffleRuby slow on a standard JVM?

The expected way to run TruffleRuby is using the Graal compiler and the Truffle
partial evaluator. TruffleRuby isn't designed to be efficient on a JVM without
these.

### Why is TruffleRuby faster on Graal?

When running on a VM with the Graal compiler, Truffle can use the API exposed by
Graal. Truffle gets the bytecode representation of all of the AST interpreter
methods involved in running your Ruby method, combines them into something like
a single Java method, optimises them together, and emits a single machine code
function. On Graal, Truffle also provides wrappers for JVM functionality not
normally available to Java applications such as code deoptimization. TruffleRuby
uses this to provide a dramatically simpler and faster implementation of Ruby.

### Where did this code come from?

[Chris Seaton](https://github.com/chrisseaton) wrote an implementation of Ruby
on Truffle and Graal as part of an internship at Oracle Labs in the first half
of 2013. The code was merged into JRuby in early 2014. Benoit Daloze and Kevin
Menard joined as researchers in the second half of 2014, then Petr Chalupa in
2015, Brandon Fish in 2016 and Duncan MacGregor in 2017. Since then we have also
accepted contributions from people outside Oracle Labs. In 2017 the code was
forked back out of JRuby after it had matured.

### Who do I ask about TruffleRuby?

The best way to get in touch with us is to join us in
https://gitter.im/graalvm/truffleruby, but you can also Tweet to
[@TruffleRuby](https://twitter.com/truffleruby), or email
chris.seaton@oracle.com.

### How do I know if I’m using TruffleRuby?

`RUBY_ENGINE` will be `'truffleruby'`.

### How do I know if I’m using a VM that has Graal?

`Truffle.graal?` will tell you if you are also running with the Graal
dynamic compiler.

### How can I see that Truffle and Graal are working?

Put this program into `test.rb`:

```ruby
loop do
  14 + 2
end
```

As well as the instructions for running with GraalVM that are described in
[Using GraalVM](using-graalvm.md), we'll also use the `-J-Dgraal.TraceTruffleCompilation=true`
to ask Truffle to tell us when it compiles something.

```
$ ruby -J-Dgraal.TraceTruffleCompilation=true test.rb
[truffle] opt done         block in <main> test.rb:1 <opt> <split-3a9ffa1b>         |ASTSize       8/    8 |Time   103(  99+4   )ms |DirectCallNodes I    0/D    0 |GraalNodes    24/    3 |CodeSize           69 |CodeAddress 0x11245cf50 |Source   ../test.rb:1 
```

Here you can see that Truffle has decided to use Graal to compile the block of
the loop to machine code - just 69 bytes of machine code in all.

### Why doesn’t TruffleRuby work for my application or gem?

Some key gems such as Nokogiri don't yet work well, which in practice can stop a
lot of other gems and applications from running.

### Why doesn’t TruffleRuby perform well for my benchmark?

Benchmarks that we haven’t looked at yet may require new code paths to be
specialized. Currently we’ve added specialisation for the code paths in the
benchmarks and applications that we’ve been using. Adding them is generally not
complicated and over time we will have specialisations to cover a broad range of
applications.

### How is this related to `invokedynamic`?

TruffleRuby doesn’t use `invokedynamic`, as it doesn't emit bytecode. However it
does have an optimising method dispatch mechanism that achieves a similar
result.

### Why doesn't JRuby switch to Truffle as well?

JRuby is taking a different approach to optimising and adding new functionality
to Ruby. Both JRuby and TruffleRuby are important projects.

### Why did you fork from JRuby?

We merged into JRuby in order to be able to use large parts of their Java
implementation code. We forked back out of JRuby when we had got to the point
where the code that we were using needed to be modified for our purposes and we
no longer had any dependency on the core part of JRuby. Forking also allowed us
to simplify our code base.
